# How to Celebrate America’s 250th Birthday

Section: Goings On

By Sheldon Pearce and Rachel Syme

You’re reading the Goings On newsletter, a guide to what we’re watching, listening to, and doing this week. Sign up to receive it in your inbox.

In a letter to his wife, Abigail, from July 3, 1776, John Adams wrote of his idealized vision for future celebrations of American independence: “It ought to be solemnized with Pomp and Parade, with Shews, Games, Sports, Guns, Bells, Bonfires and Illuminations from one End of this continent to the other from this Time forward forever more.” Now two hundred and fifty years deep into the American experiment, his wish has become a reality, as all the hallmarks of his proposed ritual ring forth for a monumental birthday bash in New York City.

Photograph by Kent Andreasen / Kintzing

Games and sports lead the festivities. If baseball is the American pastime, there may be no better place to spend the Fourth of July than at Yankee Stadium, where the Bronx Bombers play the Minnesota Twins, led by the U.S. national-team captain Aaron Judge. Outside Nathan’s Famous on Coney Island, one of the more beloved Independence Day traditions returns: the Hot Dog Eating Contest. As competitors down dogs for ten straight minutes with a ravenous efficiency that feels worlds apart from snacking on a frank at the ballpark, eating escalates into an élite physical spectacle nearing performance art. The undefeated women’s champ and world-record holder Miki Sudo looks to raise her eleventh mustard belt, while the face of competitive eating, Joey Chestnut, seeks his eighteenth victory. But Chestnut seems to be running down his own shadow, chasing the record seventy-six dogs he ate in 2021, after a seventy-dog performance last summer.

There is also plenty of pomp, along with bells, bonfires, and illuminations. The Times Square ball will drop on a day that’s not New Year’s Eve for the first time in history, marking midnight in each American time zone to kick off birthday celebrations. In keeping with Operation Sail, a series of events commemorating special occasions over the years, Sail4th 250 ushers a fleet of tall ships from more than twenty countries into New York Harbor and toward the Statue of Liberty. The fiftieth Macy’s Fourth of July fireworks show leads what are sure to be explosive demonstrations across town, featuring the musicians Post Malone, Noah Kahan, Shaboozey, and more—“Red, White & Views” presents a waterfront view of the show from the South Street Seaport Museum, and Edge NYC’s sky-high fireworks lets partygoers enjoy the display from its observation deck with music all night.

A photograph from the series “Migrantes,” part of the exhibition “Declaring America: 1776 and Beyond.”Photograph by Joseph Rodriguez / Courtesy NYPL

Any appreciation of this milestone anniversary would be well-balanced with a consideration of history, and the New York Public Library’s ongoing exhibition reckoning with the complicated American legacy, “Declaring America: 1776 and Beyond,” honors the signing of the Declaration of Independence with a viewing of the document itself (on display July 1-7). For a less traditional journey through the last two hundred and fifty years, there’s “Growing America,” at the New York Botanical Garden, an exhibition exploring American agricultural history, featuring botanical illustrations, planting ledgers, and objects from Presidential libraries alongside living-plant displays tracing the evolution of our food traditions (July 4-Oct. 18). The Met offers an ode to the melting pot with performances of “the national anthems,” the 2014 choral composition by the Pulitzer Prize-winning composer David Lang (July 4 at 2 P.M., 4 P.M., and 6 P.M.). Devised by taking phrases from national anthems across the globe and translating them into English, and performed by the Clarion Choir with Catalyst Quartet, the piece imagines national identity as not a xenophobic position but an act of coalition building.—Sheldon Pearce

On and Off the Avenue

Rachel Syme investigates the latest in Day-Glo fashion.

Illustration by Simone Noronha

It is a vibrant moment to be a New Yorker: the sun is shining, the Knicks are on top, Mayor Zohran Mamdani is uniting the city in exuberant celebration, and things are looking bright. So why not wear some color? Lately, I’ve found myself drawn, much like a peacock in heat, to vivid, high-visibility hues; it feels like the age of drab, beige, “quiet luxury” clothing is finally giving way to a fuller spectrum of sartorial expression. This past month, when the entire city was in the grip of basketball mania, my eyes have felt newly refreshed by the abundance of royal blue and traffic-cone orange on the streets. During the Knicks’ victory parade, the undulating downtown crowd looked, from afar, not unlike a school of tropical clown fish. It made me yearn to throw out my black and white tees and reimagine my whole closet in Technicolor; only good sense is stopping me. (I’ll want those black shirts, come fall.) I had this feeling again recently when, rewatching “Sex and the City” (my annual summer tradition), I saw an outfit that Sarah Jessica Parker, as Carrie Bradshaw, wears in the fourth season for a night out dancing. It’s a semi-sheer, white jersey minidress, but the real attraction is what she has on underneath: a hot-pink bra, which glows through her dress like a salt lamp. When a friend exclaims, “Look what you’re almost wearing!” she replies, “Day-Glo underwear, look into it!” So I did, diving into a sustained search for neon lingerie of my own. I ended up settling on the “Allegra” balconette from Journelle ($74), which comes not only in electric raspberry, but also chartreuse, tangerine, sunflower, and a radiant, highly saturated seafoam green. The colors reminded me of the trademark tones such as Blaze Orange and Saturn Yellow, invented by the Day-Glo Color Corp., a company originally founded by the brothers Robert and Joseph Switzer in the nineteen-thirties. The Switzers’ big invention—dyes that turned fabric fluorescent—had both military and civic applications, but it swept the fashion world in the sixties, the heyday of trippy, acid-hued garb. And you can still channel it! Get some neon-yellow jelly flats from Los Angeles Apparel ($28) or bright-pink gauze joggers from Gap ($39.95). Erdem has a gorgeous lime-green satin shell ($1,465), or maybe you fancy a Maison de Sabre saddle bag ($398) in tiger-lily orange. Think pink in a feather-trimmed Trina Turk tank ($258), cool off in a margarita-hued polo knit from Rachel Antonoff ($298), or wriggle into an acid-yellow bikini ($220) from Left on Friday. Look around, and you’ll see a veritable rainbow of options. This summer is no time to fade away.—Rachel Syme

P.S. Good stuff on the internet:
