# An ageing society might not cost too much

Section: Finance & economics
Date: July 9th 2026
Rubric: A dystopian vision of the future may not come to pass

The year is 2100. It is a grim time to be of working age. Not only must you put up with rising sea levels, rampant rogue AIs and colleagues who, 80 years after the pandemic, still do not know how to mute themselves on a video call, but your take-home pay is meagre. Taxes to finance state support for the vast grey population take an ever-larger chunk of your wage. After a century of health-care spending growing faster than the economy, there is little for anything but pills, hospital beds and nurses.

Economic theory lends support to science fiction. Spending on health care depends on how much it costs to provide and how much treatment is needed. Generally, the former has increased over time. Economists attribute this to Baumol’s cost disease, diagnosed by William Baumol, an American economist. Technologically intensive sectors (think of manufacturing or software development) get more productive. Labour-intensive service sectors do not. A doctor’s consultation takes roughly as long as it did a century ago. Yet physicians’ pay must match increases in faster-growing skilled industries, or all the doctors will go to work in tech. (Baumol pointed out that a string quartet still took 45 minutes to perform a Schubert work, but was paid vastly more than when the composer was alive.)

As for the volume of health care, there is a debate over whether “expansion” outweighs “compression”. As medical knowledge improves people live longer but not for ever. Eventually they fall ill and die. The question is whether the total time spent poorly expands as the population ages, becoming more decrepit and needing more complex and expensive care, or whether the same sort of advances that keep them alive also keep them healthier. Sickness would become compressed into just a few years before death.

Two new papers from the National Bureau of Economic Research, a repository of economic thought, suggest that the vision of health care gobbling up tax revenues may not come to pass. In the first, David Cutler and Lev Klarnet, both of Harvard University, observe that in 2024 America spent $1trn less on health care than official forecasts from 2010. The second is by Liran Einav, of Stanford University, and Amy Finkelstein, of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). Using a survey of users of Medicare, America’s system of health insurance for the old, they find that, whereas expected lifetime spending on Social Security (ie, pensions) rose by 14% between 1993 and 2017, the expected cost of Medicare increased by only 6%. That is partly because elderly Americans have been collecting their pensions for longer but spending less time seriously ill.

The papers point to improvements on both sides of the equation. Start with the cost of providing health care in hospitals. Messrs Cutler and Klarnet point out that, between 2000 and 2010, it consistently rose by around 2.3 percentage points above inflation—but that later something changed. Between 2011 and 2024 hospital costs rose by only 0.5 percentage points more than overall prices. Technology has played a role. Technological improvements in health care come in two types: some are adopted because economies get richer and can afford to treat new things; others make it cheaper to provide the same outcomes. For much of the past century, the first type dominated the second. Now, it seems the second type has taken over. Baumol’s cost disease turned out to be curable.

On top of that, less health care is needed than was once expected. Health-care systems may have become more efficient at targeting treatments, and insurers better at saying no. The old are also getting healthier. Mr Einav and Ms Finkelstein point out that since 1993 Americans’ life expectancy at age 66 has risen by 2.4 years, which are (on average) entirely healthy. They can expect an extra three years of healthy life. The amount of time spent in the severest mental and physical distress has declined by 0.6 years. That means less spent on extremely pricey residential care or home help for the infirm.

Improvements are not limited to America. As this newspaper pointed out three years ago, health-care spending has slowed (as a share of GDP) across the OECD, a club of mostly rich countries. Another new paper, by Sheila Diane Smith and Joseph Newhouse in the American Journal of Health Economics, makes the same point—and predicts that spending per person will grow by around 2% over the next decade in the OECD (excluding America), compared with 4% before 2009. Spending on health care as a share of GDP will rise by only a tenth of a percentage point each year.

The good news for the grandchildren does not end there. Another new working paper, by Daron Acemoglu, of MIT, and others, finds that ageing societies are no poorer. Much of the demographic transition has happened already, the authors note, allowing economists to estimate the effect on growth of declining birth rates. Looking across America they find that in areas with steeper falls in fertility, productivity growth among people of working age is higher. That, they theorise, is because such places have been far better at adopting labour-saving technology. There may be more old people in 2100 but the workers supporting them may have fusion-powered quantum-AI colleagues sharing the burden.

This does not mean all is well. Pensions will remain a pricey problem. Still, they are not an insurmountable one. According to a study by the Congressional Budget Office, a fiscal watchdog, raising the American retirement age by three years, from 67 to 70, would pay a large chunk of the extra costs of Social Security by 2100. Getting that reform, or others to defray the cost, through a polarised American politics will be hard. Yet the economics literature offers hope: demography need not be destiny after all. ■

Subscribers to The Economist can sign up to our Opinion newsletter, which brings together the best of our leaders, columns, guest essays and reader correspondence.
