# Did Marcel Duchamp Ruin Art?

Section: Culture & Critics

Rubric: If you hate contemporary art, everything you dislike about it can be traced back to him.

“Bicycle Wheel,” 1951 (Museum of Modern Art, New York / © Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York / ADAGP, Paris / Association Marcel Duchamp)

Something about art disgusted Marcel Duchamp. Expression, taste, aesthetic intention—anything that gave off a whiff of the precious, he recoiled from. He was modern. He relished the impersonal operations of chance. He loved jokes and sex and the movements of modern machinery. “Painting is finished,” he said to the Romanian sculptor Constantin Brâncuși at an air show in Paris in 1912, when he was 25. “Who will do any better than that propeller?”

The next year, Duchamp mounted a bicycle wheel onto an upside-down fork fixed to a wooden stool. He enjoyed the way the spokes rotated around a central axis, like a propeller, and how they reflected shimmering light, like a fireplace. He wouldn’t come up with the term until two years later, but Duchamp had created the first “readymade.” The mischievous, machine-obsessed, maddeningly inconsistent Frenchman was on his way to having an impact on modern creativity comparable to that of Richard Wagner or Charles Baudelaire on an earlier generation of modernists.

Duchamp left behind a legacy that people either love or loathe. He is known as the father of conceptual art, but his so-called ideas were mostly idle notions, provocations, speculations. Opinion divides on whether he snuffed out or emancipated art. But fret as we might about the fate of art after Duchamp, this strange, original man—so nonchalant! so fanatical!—was engaged in something more private, urgent, and amorous (more on that later) than merely “making art.”

A visit to the massive Duchamp exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art—his first North American retrospective in more than 50 years—can feel less like taking in a traditional exhibition than like wandering through an archive. (It was organized by MoMA’s curators Ann Temkin and Michelle Kuo, and Matthew Affron of the Philadelphia Museum of Art.) The items on display, many of them replicas sanctioned by the artist, have none of the aloof self-sufficiency, the “aura,” we expect from great art. Each object is instead more like a footnote or an index entry for something that once existed, was once thought, once got a laugh. The farther you advance, the more the show starts to feel forensic, like a crime scene. Near the end, your suspicions are confirmed: On display is a poster that Duchamp designed for his first-ever retrospective, at the Pasadena Art Museum in 1963. It features a mock WANTED notice offering a $2,000 reward. The mug shots are of himself.

If you dislike contemporary art, all of the things you hate about it can be traced back to Duchamp. Art that requires no skill or that was made, conversely, with great skill by people other than the “artist” claiming credit for it. Art that is all backstory, that leans so heavily on verbal explanations that it would collapse in a heap without them. Art tailored to generate pretentious academic dissertations. Art as cult fodder, marginalia, obscurantism—Duchamp inaugurated all of this.

Yet his work has a lively, quicksilver quality that continues to feel generative. You can sense his wicked intelligence flickering behind some of the most rebellious, winningly unselfserious impulses in contemporary art. He’s so funny. Call me puerile, but I still laugh at his reproduction of the Mona Lisa, on which he drew a mustache and goatee in pencil. He called the piece L.H.O.O.Q.; the letters, spoken individually in French, sound like Elle a chaud au cul (“She has a hot ass”).

He denied being an influence on anyone, but in truth his artistic progenies are everywhere. Artists who use readymades aren’t the only ones borrowing from Duchamp. Also in his debt are artists who incorporate chance; make assemblages and installations; play with alter egos and cross-dressing; present their own lives as works of art; embrace copies, replicas, factory-style production; mock the art market by presenting as “art” things that are clearly absurd or worthless (Yves Klein selling empty space, Piero Manzoni selling cans of his own excrement, Maurizio Cattelan selling a banana taped to a wall); make work involving machines, eroticism, molds of body parts, archives, graffiti, optical illusions, puns. The list of those who haven’t been influenced by Duchamp would likely be shorter.

Duchamp himself, one of seven children, grew up in an affluent household just outside Rouen, where “so much artistry” ran in his family, he later said, that it was like being immersed in an “aesthetic bath.” Though his father was a notary, his grandfather had been a successful artist. His mother, too, was an amateur artist in her youth, and his older brothers, Gaston and Raymond, gave up law and medicine, respectively, and became artists in Paris. Suzanne, one of his younger sisters, also became an artist.

From the beginning, Duchamp’s sense of his calling seemed to have had more to do with familial love than any kind of inner aesthetic conviction. “When I was 16, I thought for about six months that I’d like to be a notary like my father,” he later explained, “but that was just because I loved my father. I adored my brothers.” In 1904, he moved to Paris to join them.

The opening galleries at MoMA lead us briskly from the artist’s early satirical cartoons—their sly captions anticipating his later, punning titles—through a smattering of richly colored Cézanne- and Matisse-influenced paintings to his semi-abstract, Cubist works, all in shades of brown. Duchamp played chess starting in childhood. In the 1910s, he began to funnel a growing interest in systems of logic and machines (starting with coffee mills and chocolate grinders) into, strangely enough, a lifelong preoccupation with eroticism.

I think of Duchamp’s oeuvre, touched by the same World War I nihilism that produced Dada, as an attempt to generate inventive energy from the trauma of total war, exile, and modern conformity. But no one who delves into Duchamp can shake the feeling that erotic fixations and frustrated romantic love are at the core of his imaginative universe. How else to explain his focus on masturbation? He used his own semen in at least one artwork, used chocolate grinders as a metaphor for masturbation (“The bachelor grinds his chocolate himself”), and explained his enduring obsession with circles and rotation as “a kind of onanism.”

Duchamp’s life was marked by two serious cases of unrequited love. The object of the first was Gabriële Buffet-Picabia, whom Duchamp met when he was about 24. She promptly introduced him to her husband, Francis Picabia, a playboy and a pioneer of abstract art. Buffet-Picabia had studied avant-garde music in Paris and Berlin, and she now pushed Picabia and Duchamp into new approaches to visual art. Recognizing Duchamp’s paradoxical nature, she saw an anxious perfectionist, “possessed by a need for absolute logic,” and yet also a rebel who embraced randomness. The trio enjoyed in-jokes, road trips in fast cars (Picabia was obsessed with automobiles), and artistic experiments. In Gabriële, a biographical novel about Buffet-Picabia, their great-grandmother, Ann and Claire Berest describe Picabia and Duchamp as sharing “the same taste for shattered icons, for the art of irony and the irony of art, for jokes no matter the circumstance, and the idea that God is dead.”

Nude Descending a Staircase (No. 2), 1912 (Philadelphia Museum of Art, Louise and Walter Arensberg Collection / © Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York / ADAGP, Paris / Association Marcel Duchamp)

Duchamp was taken aback when his painting of a nude woman descending a staircase, her movements captured in the manner of a superimposed sequence of stop-motion photographs, was presented at the 1913 Armory Show in New York and made him notorious. Nude Descending a Staircase (No. 2) was lampooned in the press (an “explosion in a shingle mill” was how one critic described it). But audiences had seen nothing like it, and, in a culture trying to make sense of onrushing modernity, it quickly became the most famous painting in America. Its reception encouraged Duchamp to travel to the United States in the summer of 1915. War was raging in Europe, and he stayed for three years. A woman friend said he was “lionized by tout New York and courted by most of the female population.”

Many experts, though, believe he was allegorizing his unfulfilled longing for his best friend’s wife in the masterpiece he embarked on during those years, The Bride Stripped Bare by Her Bachelors, Even, which he continued to labor over for eight more and left poignantly unfinished. The Large Glass, as it’s more commonly called, consists of two glass panels set vertically in a metal frame. The glass is inscribed—in lead wire, lead foil, oil, varnish, and dust—with diagrammatic imagery evoking machinery. The machines represent a bride (above) and nine bachelors (below). When the glass cracked during transportation, Duchamp put the pieces back together, relishing the random-looking lines of breakage (it is now permanently on display in the Philadelphia Museum of Art). He planned to have the work accompanied by a book-length guide to the abstruse and self-involved thinking that went into it, but ended up settling for an unbound pile of notes called The Green Box.

While he worked on The Large Glass, he produced a series of readymades with witty titles. The most famous appeared in 1917, when Duchamp turned a porcelain urinal on its back and signed it “R. Mutt.” Fountain, as he called the piece, is a provocation, a prank. But it’s also an homage to the wonders of modern plumbing. Two years earlier, three such urinals had been displayed at the Newark Museum, whose founding director, John Cotton Dana, pronounced that “the genius and skill which have gone into the adornment and perfecting of familiar household objects should receive the same recognition as do now the genius and skill of painting in oils.”

Amused by this way of thinking, Duchamp began to ridicule those who kept at painting, rebuking them for being obsessed with the smell of paint and deriding their efforts as “retinal art” (art that engages only the eye). He wanted to bring art back to what it had been during the Renaissance, when Leonardo da Vinci understood it as a cosa mentale—an intellectual matter. But Duchamp’s idea of “intellectual” was always gravitating toward the erotic: “I want to grasp things with the mind,” he said, “the way the penis is grasped by the vagina.”

In 1920, Duchamp decided to create a female alter ego, Rose Sélavy. Being “a lone individual with a masculine name,” he explained 40 years later, didn’t suffice, and he wanted “to make another personality from myself.” He changed the spelling to Rrose Sélavy, to make it sound more like Eros, c’est la vie. “Rose” specialized in facetious entrepreneurial gambits (supported by wealthy patrons, Duchamp enjoyed mocking the profit motive), optical illusions, and sexual innuendo.

And then, three years later, having successfully overturned everyone’s idea of what art might be (a snow shovel! an ampoule of air! a portrait of the artist in drag!), Duchamp returned to Paris and, for more than a decade, dedicated himself to chess. He played in high-level tournaments, represented France at four Chess Olympiads, and even co-wrote a book on chess theory. But he continued to dabble in graphic design and tended to his legacy by creating elaborate portable boxes with mirrors and secret compartments, all filled with fastidiously executed small-scale reproductions of his bizarre but brilliant work. He settled in Manhattan during World War II but died in France in 1968.

A year later, the world learned that Duchamp had worked in secret for more than 20 years on a diorama-like work called Étant donnés (which will be on view when the show travels to the Philadelphia Museum of Art, where it resides). It consists of an old wooden door at the end of a corridor, with two peepholes, through which the viewer spies a brick wall with a large opening. Beyond this can be seen the cropped torso, along with an arm and legs, of a naked woman splayed corpse-like on branches and leaves, her shaved genitalia exposed, her left arm holding up a shining gas lamp.

For the woman’s body, Duchamp assembled casts of the limbs of his second wife, “Teeny” Sattler—whom he married in 1954 after she left her art-dealer husband, Pierre Matisse (son of Henri)—as well as of two of his lovers: Mary Reynolds, an avant-garde bookbinder, with whom he carried on an affair starting in the 1920s, and the surrealist sculptor Maria Martins, the second great thwarted love of Duchamp’s life, after Buffet-Picabia. They had an intense affair in New York in the ’40s and early ’50s, and Duchamp was devastated when her husband, a Brazilian diplomat, was transferred to Paris and Martins chose to go with him. Étant donnés, which Jasper Johns called “the strangest work of art in any museum,” is a transgressive, deeply disturbing piece that continues to flummox its would-be interpreters. If it functions as a romantic tribute, and perhaps an art-historical one (it most obviously calls to mind Gustave Courbet’s The Origin of the World ), it’s also a creepy, confusing, isolating experience that turns every viewer into a morbid voyeur of a bewildering sex crime.

Multiple Portrait of Marcel Duchamp, 1917 (Private Collection, France / © 2026 Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York / ADAGP, Paris / Estate of Marcel Duchamp)

“Our interest’s on the dangerous edge of things,” Robert Browning wrote in his dramatic monologue “Bishop Blougram’s Apology.” “The honest thief, the tender murderer, / the superstitious atheist.” Had Browning encountered Duchamp, he might have added, “The shy attention-seeker, the nonchalant fanatic, the heartsick Casanova.”

Duchamp was interested in the dangerous edge of art—that zone of uncertainty where the fiction of the “aesthetic” drops away and the purpose of art grows blurry. In “The Creative Act,” a brief speech he delivered in Houston in 1957, he said that “the creative act is not performed by the artist alone” but also by the spectator, whose interpretations bring the work to life. By dissolving the barrier between art and life and emphasizing the role of the viewer, Duchamp unraveled art’s claim to special status. Suddenly, anything could be art and anyone could make it. Indeed, you were making it just by looking at it.

Stripping away the aura of preciousness around art proved enormously liberating. But it also set up a quandary: If art is undifferentiated from life—if it is an arbitrary designation—why even maintain it as a separate category? If a bicycle wheel or a snow shovel can be art, what is the point of exhibiting these objects in galleries? Why not contemplate them (if that’s what you wish to do) in the bicycle-repair shop or the basement? Why have “art” at all?

Duchamp’s habitual skepticism had the salutary effect of returning us to first principles. For him, part of being modern—living in the aftermath of Darwin, Freud, Nietzsche, and the trenches of World War I—meant dispensing with inherited illusions. “All this twaddle, existence of God, atheism, determinism, free will, societies, death, etc. are the pieces of a game of chess called language,” he once wrote in a letter. “Art,” by his reckoning, was merely another word, a piece in the game.

Busy scorching communal “fictions,” Duchamp became ever more absorbed by private concerns that could often be impenetrable. If he was forever puzzling over what art is and isn’t, he was also endlessly puzzling over the relationship between sex and love. Averse to sentimentality, he didn’t really believe in romantic love. But being intellectually skeptical of something is not the same as banishing it from one’s existence. If Duchamp remained, in spite of everything, an artist, he also remained a man prone to falling in love. “Contradiction,” he quipped near the end of his life, “is the whole point.”

This article appears in the August 2026 print edition with the headline “The Mischievous, Maddening Marcel Duchamp.” When you buy a book using a link on this page, we receive a commission. Thank you for supporting The Atlantic.
