# Child suspects are being prosecuted at younger ages

Section: International
Date: July 9th 2026
Rubric: Some governments are lowering the age of criminal responsibility. That may backfire

“I’ll guide you,” wrote a user called Akon on Signal, an encrypted messaging app. “Pick up the guns and then take a taxi and go straight there. Like a soldier.” In October 2024, court records show, a 13-year-old boy in Gothenburg, Sweden had agreed to do a job in exchange for SKr200,000 (about $19,000 at the time). At around 7am on October 10th the boy received a YouTube tutorial on how to load a gun. Shortly after that he strode past a police car and shot at the entrance of Elbit Systems, Israel’s largest defence contractor, in broad daylight. News reports suggest the attack had been orchestrated by a Swedish drug gang with links to Iran, a year into Israel’s war in Gaza.

The boy was arrested almost instantly. But he was never charged, probably for the same reason he was recruited in the first place: he was below Sweden’s minimum age of criminal responsibility (MACR) of 15—the threshold at which people are deemed able to grasp the consequences of their actions, and thus punishable for them. Swedish officials are pushing to lower the MACR to 14 for serious crimes ahead of parliamentary elections in September, as voters demand a response to a spate of gang violence in recent years. In 2022 the country had one of the highest rates of gun homicides in Europe. Last year there was a wave of bomb explosions and shootings, a number of which involved children.

Politicians in other countries from Brazil to the Philippines and South Korea are trying to lower their MACR, often for similar reasons (see chart). The Maldives may soon lower it from 15 to 12. Argentina this year has lowered its MACR from 16 to 14 at the behest of Javier Milei, the president. Last month Northern Ireland blocked a proposal to raise the MACR from ten, the lowest in Europe (along with England, Wales and Switzerland), to 14.

Governments are also moving to impose tougher punishments on the children they do prosecute. Mr Milei has championed his changes with the slogan “adult crime, adult punishment”. In 2024 Queensland, Australia, passed its own “Adult Crime, Adult Time” law (then expanded it twice). Children there as young as ten can be sentenced to life in prison for murder. And starting this month in Sweden convicts as young as 15 will be imprisoned, ending a long-standing policy of detaining them in youth homes. If Sweden’s change in MACR goes through, 14-year-old criminals will go to prison, too.

Officials in many of these countries are responding to rising public pressure over high-profile incidents of youth violence. In the Philippines, a 14-year-old boy was one of two teenagers accused of carrying out a school shooting in June that left three dead, prompting some politicians (though not yet Ferdinand Marcos, the president) to call for lowering the country’s MACR from 15. One of the killers was a player of GoreBox, a first-person shooter game, which the government has now banned.

In Argentina in 2024, prosecutors say, someone inside a prison hired a 15-year-old gunman for 200,000 pesos ($200 at the time) to murder a petrol-station attendant—a crime that was captured on CCTV footage and shocked the country. The teen was too young to be prosecuted, provoking an outcry. Julio Burdman of Isasi/Burdman, a pollster, found 68% of people favoured lowering the MACR. “Public opinion is quite convinced that young people are the drivers of crime,” Mr Burdman says. “And that’s why politicians go after it.”

The actual data on youth crimes across countries are more murky than the perception. In some countries, including Germany and Sweden, there have been reported spikes in serious crime among young people. And in South Korea the number of crimes among children under 14 nearly doubled in four years, to 21,000 last year.

But such rises have generally been from a relatively tiny base; in many rich countries rates of juvenile crime declined from the 1990s (when there was a previous round of get-tough-on-crime changes in law) to the 2010s. The Swedish National Council for Crime Prevention reported that in 2023 some 3,500 offences by children under 15 had been serious enough to be investigated formally, up from 1,500 in 2015. Assault was the most common offence, followed (in the case of boys) by robbery and rape. In 2025, 52 Swedish children under 15 were linked to a murder or a murder-related plot—around a third of them under 14.

How young is too young to hold a child responsible? The UN Committee on the Rights of the Child recommends a MACR of at least 14, and urges against lowering a MACR once established. Critics of lowering the age say children may not fully understand the consequences of their actions. Studies show children aged 12-14 are more impressionable, impulsive and prone to risk-taking. The brain’s pre-frontal cortex is still developing during adolescence.

But politics shapes criminal-justice systems—and often that means tough-on-crime politics. England’s MACR of ten has been on the books for more than 60 years. But in 1993 the torture and murder of a two-year-old by two ten-year-old boys prompted calls to tighten the screws further on young offenders. In 1998 Tony Blair’s Labour government abolished a common-law presumption—which prosecutors had to rebut—that children aged 10-13 are doli incapax, or incapable of wrongdoing. Australia still adheres to the same prosecutorial hurdle for suspects aged 10-13 (even while Queensland seeks to punish such children like adults). In other countries high-profile crimes similarly produce constituencies for lowering the MACR; rarely does pressure go the other way.

Politicians pushing to lower the MACR say they are motivated in part by the recruitment of youths into gang violence. In the Maldives, the government says that gangs in Malé, the capital, use children as young as 11 to carry out serious crimes. In Colombia authorities reported that 409 children were recruited by armed groups in 2024, up from 342 in 2023 (and probably a severe undercount, experts say).

In June last year, a 15-year-old Colombian boy shot a senator and presidential hopeful who died from his injuries two months later. Prosecutors said he was probably recruited by a criminal network. He was sentenced to just seven years in juvenile detention, provoking criticism that such lax punishments encourage the exploitation of minors by gangs. The UN says the longstanding problem in the country of drug-traffickers using soldaditos, or little soldiers, has been getting worse.

A report in 2025 by the European Parliament says gang recruitment is getting worse in a number of European countries as well (while noting that hard data are scarce due to shortcomings and inconsistencies in record-keeping on youth crime). The report attributes much of the rise to growing demand for recreational drugs, and finds that youths are taking part in more types of organised crime in more geographic areas than before in places like France and the Netherlands.

Inevitably this has meant more violence, too. In Marseille, where gangs are hiring adolescents as police-spotters, the report says, there have been cases of children “harming innocent bystanders or killing each other with Kalashnikovs”.

In Sweden, like in Argentina, the Maldives and elsewhere, government officials argue that lowering the MACR will let police not only improve public safety, but also help children who have gone astray by intervening earlier in their lives. To the extent that their age made them targets for recruitment, the argument goes, it may also spare some children from organised-crime recruitment.

But those who oppose lowering the MACR—including, in Sweden, the prison service, the bar association and an independent body of senior judges—fear the opposite will happen instead. In England and Wales, where the MACR is just ten, gangs recruit children as young as seven. “Gangs are going lower and lower,” says Gabriel Wessman, director of Rosersberg prison north of Stockholm.

Lowering the MACR can also do lasting harm to the children who get locked up. In 2010 Denmark, which was then enduring a wave of gang-related violence similar to Sweden’s, experimented with lowering the age from 15 to 14. Two years later the change was reversed under a new government. Authorities determined that lowering the MACR had actually led to an increase in crime: criminalising younger children increased the likelihood of their reoffending within 18 months of release. (Similarly, in England and Wales two-thirds of children aged 10-17 who served custodial sentences of under a year end up reoffending within a year of their release.)

However governments tweak their laws, gangs will find a way to hire young shooters like the 13-year-old in Gothenburg. Narcos in Latin America and gangs in Britain alike target children on Instagram and TikTok, massively widening their pool of recruits. “They can take the children that we recruit, but in one second I will put something new on Instagram, and I will recruit hundreds of children again,” one recruiter told Evin Cetin, a co-author of “Child Soldiers: How Gangs Kidnap Our Future”.

Sweden is an example of how shrewdly—and quickly—criminals can adapt to changes in the law and inflict the consequences on the young. In 2022, as gang crimes hit their peak, the government toughened a measure that gave anyone under 20 years old a “discount” on their prison sentence, lowering that threshold to under 18. Gangs quickly accelerated the recruitment of younger people online, asking them to send a photo of their passports or of their relatives’ passports before they carried out a crime. That locked them in for fear of reprisals if they got cold feet.

The case of the Elbit Systems shooting remains a telltale example of who gets punished and who often does not in organised crime. Four other teenagers, ranging in age from 15 to 19, were eventually sentenced to prison for their roles in the crime, including the recruitment of the 13-year-old boy. But not “Akon”, the person who appears to have been the mastermind. He was never identified. ■
